Have you picked up your phone to find a ridiculously large number of notifications? You clear promotional messages, ‘you may also like’ suggestions, LinkedIn requests, spam emails, unnecessary Slack, and breaking news notifications to finally find an important email from your employer denying your PTO request. We are in a world with an overwhelming amount of information. 

The cognitive revolution marked the emergence of thought, language, communication, complex cultures, and the development of tools. We, humans, have made enormous discoveries and inventions, and progressed from industrialization to advancements in better healthcare, and now to EVs and AI. Our ability to generate, share, and consume information played a vital role in this progress. We needed “critical thinking” - the ability to make the most of limited information. However, with unseen volume and speed of information generation, including that from AI, there is a crucial need for “critical ignoring.”

Critical ignoring is *not* about being uninformed, but rather about intentionally allocating attention. Humans have an attention span that ranges from a few minutes to several hours. This ability to focus and operate has been decreasing at an alarming pace over the last decade, from minutes to seconds. However, not consuming information is not an option. Given the human brain’s limitations and the information overload, critical ignoring is a viable strategy to identify the signal within the noise. 

Here are some ways to protect your mental space and attention. 

1. Be conscious: Evaluate the time you spend, the apps you use, and the frequency of usage. Volitionally ignore low-quality, misleading, and unnecessary information.
2. Verify: Confirm the information you consume is credible. For instance, a significant number of my Indian relatives obtain their news from individuals who post on Facebook and WhatsApp. Not media channels, but anyone.
3. Stay away: Do not respond to or interact with malicious actors online; this may now include AI agents as well. For example, you might be triggered to make your point with an unwilling or ignorant troll in the comments section.

Although these are fairly simple solutions, they are hard to implement. First, we are curious. When you see a notification, you don’t know its final outcome, but the banner/red blinking light triggers curiosity and also a dopamine spike, which makes it physically uncomfortable to ignore the ‘ting!’ Second, our brains are hardwired to prioritize novelty and urgency - parameters that social media exploits. Lastly, we have FOMO. Information is a form of social currency that we want to maximize, not ignore. 

These are some potential solutions, but none are one-size-fits-all. Find your cue to critically ignore the noise and make the most of the signals.